[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: As much
as we try to tell ourselves
that we as women are liberated
from the chains of servitude
of the past, we
often remain slaves
to our own minds and DNA.
You can't take thousands
of years of programming
of being perceived
as lesser than
and have that healed in
four to five decades.
But it is beginning to heal.
Cate Montana, author
of "Unearthing Venus,"
tells her version of the story
of what it is to be a woman.
A very courageous memoir,
Cate shares the fear and hope
of women everywhere
that the time truly
comes when we can
be seen for who
we are among men but
also among ourselves.
Cate, what a book.
Whoa.
I mean, I'm sure
every woman and-- do
men read your book, as well?
>>CATE MONTANA: I've been really
surprised at how many men.
It's actually about 50-50.
>>REGINA: That's fabulous.
>>MONTANA: And a positive,
very enthusiastic response
from both sexes.
>>REGINA: Well this is one of
the most vulnerable, revealing
memoirs on what it is to be a
woman that I have ever read.
And, you know, it's like you--
this conversation will reveal
it-- we've been down a
lot of the same roads.
>>MONTANA: Yeah, we have.
>>REGINA: And the
whole road of feminism
is not anything that
has ever interested me.
But as you go through
life, you start
seeing these
essential areas that
just have to be mended
up, where the wounds are,
between the sexes.
And it has to be talked about.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: So first of all,
you start your book out,
I think, at a very
appropriate place,
which I'd like you
to share with us,
with one of my favorite
interviewees-- John Perkins.
>>MONTANA: John Perkins.
>>REGINA: And work
with the Shuar tribe
and talking about the difference
between men and women.
And if you will, please,
set the stage for us
and share that and share
why you shared that
at the beginning of the book.
>>MONTANA: OK.
And you're right,
the last thing I ever
thought that I would
ever get involved in
would be feminist
anything, that I would ever
write about feminine
oriented anything,
or even write an article
about the feminine.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MONTANA: So this book came
as a big surprise for me, too.
And John Perkins is
totally responsible.
I was doing a article
and interview with him
for an article for
"Indian Country
Today," a national
Native American paper.
I've been a newspaper
and magazine
journalist for about 25 years.
And this was way back in 1999.
So we're in the middle of this
conversation and interview,
and he starts talking
about the Shuar tribe
down in the Brazilian rainforest
and their gender differences
and how they've segmented their
society along gender lines.
The men do guy things.
They hunt and they
fish and they cut down
trees for the huts and canoes.
And the women do
domestic chores,
take care of the children,
gather wild edibles.
Nothing new there.
Both men and women are equally
represented on tribal council.
That was-- OK.
So there wasn't
any-- and there was
no battle of the sexes going on.
It was very clear when he talked
about their gender dynamics
that men and women
understood themselves
in a larger context
than just he and she,
that they were actually
getting into a lot
of qualitative aspects of
being a man, being a woman.
They played to each
other's strengths
rather than their weaknesses.
And he said that there
was one job, however,
in this tribe that only
the women could do.
And that the survival of the
tribe depended upon the women
doing this one job.
And, of course, the first
thing that went off in my mind
was right, have babies, biology.
>>REGINA: Cook.
>>MONTANA: Cook, yeah.
And he said, no,
that's not it at all.
He said the Shuar
tribe understands
the masculine nature
tends towards being goal
oriented, directed,
aggressive, competitive, pedal
to the metal.
>>REGINA: Destructive.
>>MONTANA: As a result, pedal
to the metal, no stop button.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MONTANA: They
understood woman's nature
is much more intuitive, much
more community oriented, much
more grounded in
relationship, whether it
was the needs of the tribe or
the needs of their relationship
with the earth.
So the men absolutely depended
upon the women telling them
when to stop.
>>REGINA: And that
was what I liked.
He said the men will fish
until there are no more fish.
>>MONTANA: Yep.
>>REGINA: They will
kill the animals
until there are no more
animals and on and on.
And it's up to the women
to tell us when to stop.
And didn't he say then,
why aren't your women
telling you to stop?
>>MONTANA: Well, the
first part of the story
rocked my world, Regina.
And then he followed
it up with that.
He asked me, he
said-- and this is
what he was asked by this
shaman in the tribe--
where are your
Western women today?
Why are you not telling
your men to stop?
You are taking the world over
a cliff, depleting resources.
Why?
Where are you?
What are you doing?
I'm like, oh, I don't know.
I'm out there busy making
a buck, making a living,
being just as aggressive,
having not a clue where the stop
button is probably
more than any man.
Because I have more
to prove because I
came on deck in the '60s
and '70s as a woman.
>>REGINA: Yes, we're--
>>MONTANA: We'll get into that.
>>REGINA: We're going
to get into that.
>>MONTANA: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so that's true.
Oftentimes the women possess
more of the masculine traits
when you feel as
though you've had
to fight for your
place in the world.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: And so this isn't--
doesn't have to do with body
parts, as we said off camera.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: These
are deeper traits.
>>MONTANA: That conversation
changed my entire life.
I wrote the article and I was
still reeling weeks later,
contemplating the power
that the Shuar women had
to be able to tell the men to
do anything, let alone stop.
Can you imagine the women when
everybody is coming across
in the wagon trains and
the railroads to the West
and they're out
blitzkrieging the buffalo
by the hundreds of thousands
and just laying waste to them.
And women saying, I don't
think you should do that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right, exactly.
>>MONTANA: Because we had
no real validity as women.
And it wasn't
until-- You know, I
thought about it more and more.
It's like, oh my god, it's not
until I become something other
than a woman that I have
credibility and validity.
I have to be a TV editor,
or a newspaper reporter,
or a teacher, or
something like that.
Then I have credibility.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
OK, so now let's go
and do the back story,
because you were raised in late
'50s, early '60s, a little girl
in America with a mother
who played the classic role,
and a stepfather who played a
maybe less than classic role,
but certainly not a very
positive one in your life.
So let's go back
to the beginning.
>>MONTANA: Yeah, and I used to
think that "Father Knows Best,"
because that was the kind
of television programming
I was raised with.
I looked at my family
dynamics, which were sorely
dysfunctional in comparison
to "Father Knows Best,"
and I wondered,
well, what's wrong?
What's wrong with me that I
didn't get that kind of family.
My mom was a tomboy
who learned not
to be a tomboy, who learned
to be more submissive,
be polite, never say anything
against what a man would say,
and she suppressed
all of her joie de
vivre to mold herself
in a direction
that her society and that
her family had indicated
was the way to go.
And she tried her
best to get me to go
in that direction, all the
while kind of under the table
not wanting me to subdue my
own tomboy tendencies at all.
>>REGINA: It was a fine line
for her to walk in raising you.
>>MONTANA: It really was.
>>REGINA: And because your
stepfather was an angry man.
>>MONTANA: He was an
angry, wounded man,
and it's easy to say he did
the best he could considering.
But he was--
>>REGINA: He did a bad job.
>>MONTANA: He did a
very, very bad job.
And very violent, abusive,
fortunately not physically
and sexually, but of course
then the emotional abuse,
and the verbal abuse is actually
sometimes even more subtle.
At least if you've had
your head knocked off,
it's kind of like
therapeutic and purgative.
It's just like, oh, OK.
But the rest is just
more subtly undermining.
>>REGINA: The death by 1,000
cuts, I think it's called.
>>MONTANA: There you go.
>>REGINA: And so your
mother was essentially
the walking wounded for
a big part of her life.
>>MONTANA: And the
peacemaker no matter what,
because my step dad and I
would just go toe to toe.
So she would always
intervene, and smooth, put oil
on the waters.
And so she played a very
classic feminine role.
>>REGINA: But she also played
a role that was beyond not
supportive of you at a time when
you experienced a molestation
by the neighborhood paperboy.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: And I
learned maybe, it
was about 15 years
ago, maybe 20 years
ago now, it was a time in
life where my girlfriends were
starting to tell me these
various revelations,
successful women, even my
mother, even within the family,
about all of the molestations.
I was absolutely shocked
at how many of the women
I knew had been through a rape
or molestation by someone close
to them, and even in the family.
And good families.
You know, it would seem
like good families.
Nice people.
They go to church on Sundays.
So the thing is no one
ever stood up for them,
and your mother didn't
stand up for you.
>>MONTANA: My mother
didn't stand up for me.
I don't think anybody ever
stood up for my mother.
Looking back, the
neighborhood dynamics,
which writing the book was
this recapitulation of having
to try to understand all
these gender dynamics,
and how did I come out the
other end in my 40s and 50s
with my foot nailed to the
pedal trying to prove myself so
voraciously in this
world, so desperately
insecure underneath all of that.
So looking back, and looking
at the neighborhood dynamics,
Regina, I mean, one
neighbor's husband
drank, and would
lock his little kids
naked outside in the yard,
et cetera, et cetera.
It was really epidemic.
So I don't know whoever came
up with "Father Knows Best,"
and "Leave it to
Beaver," but-- Hollywood.
There you go.
>>REGINA: Now, there's another
aspect, and talking about you,
and talking about
carrying forward,
as I said when I
was introducing you,
we can have the institution
of various and forced rights
for women and other
minorities, however,
that DNA patterning on a
solo level is very real,
and you actually had
memories of past lives.
>>MONTANA: I did.
>>REGINA: As you were a child.
And I thought one
of them was really
freaky about what
happened to this woman.
Share what you were
remembering from another time.
>>MONTANA: I had early abuse
dreams, visions, memories.
At age four how
could you possibly
determine what
these things were.
I had visions of
burning, being burned,
being locked in dark
places, dungeons.
I also had a vision
of being pregnant
and sold on a
slave block in what
appeared to be Roman times.
And I didn't pass muster.
And a Roman soldier came
up and slit my belly open
with the sword.
And I died.
And like what four
year old-- in 1955,
where would I have gotten
that kind of imagery?
So it colored my subconscious
emotional security,
or lack thereof, to a degree
that I had no idea of.
And it ended up coloring
my sexual life that there
was such a mixture in
my subconscious from God
only knows where, and
what lifetimes in my DNA.
>>REGINA: But
that's in all of us.
>>MONTANA: That's in all of us.
But, you know, these
are the things.
You don't ever talk about this.
I was in my 30s before I started
talking about these things,
because I had a convoluted
understanding of pain
and pleasure around
sexuality because
of these early memories,
whatever they were.
And it wasn't until I
started talking about it,
and then I would talk
about to my girlfriends
well into a couple
of bottles of wine,
it's just like, well, have you
ever fantasized when you're
having sex with your
husband about being raped,
and they'd go, [GASP], you know,
and everything would kind of
like stop, and then they'd
go, oh my God, yes I have.
Popular genres of books.
Hello.
Welcome to the "Shades Of Gray."
And it's in this, but
it's not talked about,
because it's horrific.
>>REGINA: But these are
almost cellular memories--
>>MONTANA: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: From ancient times.
And not so ancient times.
These are cellular
memories carried forward.
>>MONTANA: This is still
going on in the Middle East.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
So I thought it was
fascinating, because you
were such a little girl.
You wouldn't have had a
context for any of that.
>>MONTANA: Certainly not.
>>REGINA: So now we go
back to your mother.
So your mother suppressed
all of this in herself,
yet she was a tomboy.
I want to talk about
the time when you got,
I think it was a bee bee gun.
I love this back story of
that, how that happened,
and how your mother showed
herself to the world.
I love it.
>>MONTANA: Yeah.
Here's how I learned
about my mom.
It was going on to
my eighth Christmas,
and my parents would
disappear to the basement
night after night
after dinner as we
were approaching Christmas.
And I was sworn never
to come downstairs.
And as it turns out I was given
a pellet gun, and a Barbie
doll.
>>REGINA: Just to make
sure you didn't go wrong.
>>MONTANA: Exactly.
But my mom and dad had been down
in the basement citing it in.
It was a bona fide gun.
It could shoot halfway through
the Washington DC telephone
book.
And so I remember
my mom way later
in life telling me this
story of, she and Nan Poppet
had way too much
bourbon one night,
and they're down in the basement
shooting the pellet gun,
and having a good time.
And she was a crack
shot as it turned out.
And she just
shocked my step dad.
And he dared her in kind
of a drunken, whatever
moment that she didn't have the
guts to shoot the cigarette out
of his mouth.
And she just took
aim, and just, pew,
and there was the tip of the
cigarette on the basement
floor.
>>REGINA: That's
when you found out
she was head of the sharp
shooting team right?
>>MONTANA: Then I
found out she was
head of the sharp
shooting club in college.
>>REGINA: She never
talked about it.
She was June Cleaver.
>>MONTANA: She was June Cleaver.
Exactly.
June Cleaver didn't
do that sort of stuff.
>>REGINA: And so for you, a
lot of your power, and this
is another very typical, maybe
looking into the subconscious
reasons for this as well,
or the deep memory of it,
you were very drawn to the world
of horses, animals and nature
in general, but horses.
And you even used to ride
with Caroline Kennedy
when you were young.
>>MONTANA: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And let's talk about that
world, what it brought to you.
Tell us a little bit
about what Carolyn
was like, because
she's so private.
We never get to hear anything
about what she was like.
>>MONTANA: Oh, I
didn't really know her.
Those of us in the
pony club, we were
supposed to stay at the
back of the hunt field
and take care of
the-- And Caroline
was-- gosh how old was she?
About seven at that time,
and I was nine or ten.
And so we were like
stuck with Carolyn.
So that was that.
>>REGINA: OK, you're
stuck with Carolyn,
but the thing is you were
living in, by this time,
in nature with nature really
into horses, competition,
in a very elite lifestyle.
>>MONTANA: In a very
elite lifestyle.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about that.
>>MONTANA: It was really
as totally as dysfunctional
as Washington DC
suburbia had been.
The vices were just more
expensive and more accessive,
and were looked upon as
something that everybody did,
and it was almost like, well,
how much you could drink,
and how dysfunctional you could
be was almost a mark of pride.
>>REGINA: To go
to your therapist
to do messed up things.
>>MONTANA: Et cetera, et cetera.
It was very odd, but mostly
living in the country
and being raised
on a farm, Regina,
was my first taste of
genuine, soul level freedom.
And it got me out of the
church orientation about what
God is or isn't, and
me as a soul or not,
whatever, and
introduced me to life.
And such a raging
life force that was
unbridled and uncontrollable.
And living in the '50s
and '60s, and even
still, life, we live in a
very masculinized society,
and control is one of the Daoist
Yang systematic, rule bound,
law bound control is one
of the Yang tendencies.
And so, God, being raised on a
farm, getting out on my pony,
and having no responsibility
except going wherever
I wanted to go for
hours, half a day, a day,
and just be gone in
nature changed my life.
It really opened me up to
my own soul, and my heart,
and I looked at that, and I
would ask the Sunday school
teacher and the Reverend
questions like-- Well, then I
ended up in a Catholic convent
school in high school, which
is another story.
But, you know,
did I live before,
because I've got all
these old memories.
I've got stuff inside me that
says I've been here before.
And so I would ask, and
they would go, oh, well, no.
You only go around once
in life, so you better
be good little girl.
And nature told me otherwise.
I looked at the cycles of the
seasons, and a calf would die,
and a calf would be born,
and a foal would come.
And there was a rhythm,
and a naturalness,
and an uncontrollable
expansion to nature.
And now, looking
back, I realized
that I had many, many peak
experiences and somadee
moments when I was growing up.
I Was just tuned in,
and once I was set free
it was just like, whew.
I just--
>>REGINA: And what's the
thing with girls and horses?
What is this thing?
I mean, I couldn't have a horse.
We didn't have that
kind of land or money.
I always wanted a horse.
So I'd read books about horses.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: And it's
such a deep love.
What is this?
>>MONTANA: I wish
I knew for sure.
I know that the horse is
seen as a power animal.
In the medicine cards, horse
is about power and strength.
And I think, perhaps if I
wanted to get all psychological,
it's because we had so little
power that we were attracted
to these amazingly beautiful,
graceful animals that-- Well,
horsepower that
powered everything.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MONTANA: From the grist
mills to your transportation.
Everything depended
on horsepower.
And for the gender
that had no power,
I think it's kind of natural
that we went in that direction.
>>REGINA: So that's very
normal for young girls,
pubescent girls.
It's an old, old tale.
And so let's move into
the pubescent years.
Your sex education
from your mother.
What was it, one sentence?
>>MONTANA: Go out
and look at the cows.
Go out and watch the cows.
That was my sex education
101, which, of course,
I went out and watched
the cows, and the heifers
humped the heifers, and the
steers humped the heifers,
and the steers
humped the steers.
And every once and--
the bull and the cows
actually did very
precious little.
And I was like really?
So, as I wrote in the book,
the missionary position
came as a shock when
I discovered it.
>>REGINA: Well, your mother
obviously was a modest woman.
>>MONTANA: She was
incredibly modest.
>>REGINA: And nor did many
of the women of that era
have any answers.
I mean, my mother shoved
a little five page
book in my hand.
I mean, that's what they
did, and walked away.
And you just learned
to deal with it.
And you'll figure out
the rest on your own.
But you did have
over a long period
of time, kind of a
blossoming of yourself
with a young man that worked
there with you with the horses.
>>MONTANA: Oh yeah.
>>REGINA: So you did kind of
learn through all of that.
>>MONTANA: Don't we all.
Haven't we for
thousands of years
just do what comes naturally.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So you had the boy there
who worked alongside you,
which we can get
to in a little bit.
So after you got "the curse,"
and you went on through school,
and you learned
how to be charming.
>>MONTANA: And what
a thing to call it.
>>REGINA: "The curse."
>>MONTANA: What a
thing to call it.
>>REGINA: I know, your
mother called it the curse.
And so did all of them.
So you go through, and now
you're in this wealthy area,
and you're in this very
wealthy social scene, which
is very dysfunctional.
But you found that
you had power.
You could flirt.
You could start using the
feminine wiles with men,
with young boys.
And what was that like for you
at that point in your life,
after having observed the
natural world around you?
>>MONTANA: It seemed natural and
unnatural all at the same time.
It came just like,
whew, out of nowhere.
I had no sex education, as you
pointed out, like any of us.
>>REGINA: Nobody did, yeah.
>>MONTANA: And so it became a
matter of just like something
that you just do it.
And I know the attitude hasn't
changed 40, 30 years later.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MONTANA: It was
something to do.
>>REGINA: But you were
proving yourself, too.
>>MONTANA: And I
was proving myself.
>>REGINA: You had power
as a feminine creature.
>>MONTANA: Yes.
I suppose.
It was totally
unconscious, Regina.
I didn't think about
any of this stuff.
I just went where my
hormones drove me.
>>REGINA: But you are driven.
OK.
So let's get on down
the road now to college,
and let's get beyond that.
Let's get to when you
started in your career, which
this is where our lives
started paralleling.
You're talking about a
time when women were not
in the world of
sports television.
I was in front of the
camera, my little makeup
artist and blue
eyeshadow talking
all about the game
coming up, and you
were in the truck with the guys.
>>MONTANA: I was, as a tape
editor, and did slow motion
replays.
>>REGINA: But you were the
first at a network level?
>>MONTANA: As far as
I'm aware, absolutely.
The National Association
of Broadcast Engineers
and Technicians went
on strike in 1977.
I was called out of
the blue, because I'd
been working in television
as a director at that point.
I got a call out of the
blue from some guy in LA
who was looking to
hire scabs, basically,
when NABET went
on strike, and did
I want to run tape at the
1977 Monday Night Football
opening in Saint Louis.
And so I said yes, and that was
an answer that changed my life.
I crossed the picket lines,
hundreds of middle aged men,
and got to the trucks.
And 45 other middle
aged men, you
know, looking like obviously
they know what they're doing,
and there was me.
And it was terrifying.
>>REGINA: I can imagine.
It was terrifying being on
my end, and as a token female
in the world of sports.
But there were only three of
us in front of the camera.
You were in a room
full of these men.
And you were in it.
It's a very different world,
a more raw world you were in.
>>MONTANA: It was
a very raw world,
and I learned to
curse like a sailor,
and got the hide
of a rhinoceros,
because if you've ever worked
with any of the ABC sports
directors you have to have
the hide of a rhinoceros.
But, you know,
actually it was so up
my alley, because looking
back there was never
a time in my life
that I didn't want
to prove myself
as good as a man.
It was a-- not even
a subconscious drive.
I was very aware that
I wanted to go out
and I wanted to be anything
but like my mother.
I wanted to prove
myself as good as a guy.
I wanted to make money.
And I wanted to do it in
however I could most stand out.
You know, I wasn't
going to be a teacher.
I was going to end up being a
TV engineer for God's sakes.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MONTANA: And I did
really, really well at it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but when the
time came you had a boyfriend.
He was in the industry.
And when it was time to
choose one or the other of you
for a promotion, it wasn't you.
>>MONTANA: That's right.
>>REGINA: I get that.
So you were the more
qualified of the two,
but of course at this time,
that's not going to happen.
But speak about what happened
when you were passed over,
the reason you were given
for being passed over.
>>MONTANA: Oh, this was at
the beginning of my television
career.
I was working as
a tape operator.
I got my boyfriend in
the door about six months
to eight months after
I got hired at WIS TV.
And then I was-- a switching
position came open.
I had been training.
I was qualified.
And my-- the Production
Manager took me aside
and said we've got a
position coming open.
I know that you're
better qualified,
but I'm giving it to--
>>REGINA: Your boyfriend.
>>MONTANA: Your boyfriend.
So he says, because
I know how it is.
You guys live together, and
it's really hard for men
to have women surpass them.
And so it's going to be
easier for your relationship
if I promote him first.
And, oh, but thank you for
making that decision for me.
And I had found that
keeping my lips zipped,
and not making waves,
and certainly not going
into emotional
territory had been
the best way for me
to survive in TV.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MONTANA: And so I wasn't
going to jump up and down
and go, feminism, let
me call my lawyer.
I just went zip.
And then I got the
next promotion,
and then, and then, and then.
>>REGINA: I had a very similar--
>>MONTANA: But it was--
>>REGINA: It's hard.
It is horrifying.
I had a similar
situation as a co-anchor
in a newscast, nightly newscast.
And I was called in by
the owner of the station
to say, could you take
over all the ad-libbing,
because he didn't have
a natural ability.
Anything that wasn't scripted
was disastrous at that time.
It was bad.
And so they said, would
you please take over
the control of it.
And I thought, well,
this is kind of weird.
I mean, that doesn't look
very good for the show.
But they said, no, we
need you to do this.
So I'd have to kind of jump in,
and take over all the ad-libs,
and keep the pace of the
show going, and everything.
So, as it was time to
renew contracts they said,
oh, we've just had
a budget cut, and we
can't have a female
as our sole anchor.
And they kept him and dumped me.
I mean, these things happened
repeatedly those days
in television.
It's just the way it was.
And I'm not litigious.
I wasn't going to
go jump up and down.
Keep it zipped.
Move on down the road.
That's what you do.
And that programming
in and of itself, that
still lives inside.
>>MONTANA: It does.
And what's fascinating
to me is that I
never, until fast forward,
ah geez, 25 years?
I never really even
thought about it.
I mean, it was painful.
I moved on.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that's what you do.
>>MONTANA: But if anybody
ever asked me, were you ever
discriminated against, I'd go,
oh, no, I was one the guys.
I just kind of like glossed
over this incredibly deep chasm
between the masculine
and the feminine,
how I was supposed
to be, how I had
to be to pony up and compete,
and still it was never enough,
how there was this pervasive
sense that I was still
not enough, not good
enough, second class.
And I think it was
probably too painful
for me to even
make it conscious.
>>REGINA: But it just lives
in the subconscious then.
>>MONTANA: It lives
in the subconscious.
And it wasn't until
I wrote this book
that I started-- I assiduously
went back through my life
to look at, well, what were
the things that happened
in my life that showed this
male, female dichotomy,
and what we're moving
out of, thank god
at long last, in our society,
because if we don't learn
how to bridge out of the
whole masculine orientation,
then we're kind of cooked
as a species I do believe.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, so I want to go
back to something
we didn't talk about earlier.
Along the way in the
book what you talk about
after your mother gave
you your sex education,
go out and watch
the cows, you start
reflecting on a story
of the Dugara tribe.
>>MONTANA: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about that for a moment.
It's not that way
everywhere in the world.
The indigenous cultures
have a much more holistic
and beautiful way
of bringing people
into their coming
of age experiences,
and preparing them for sexual
union in marriage later.
>>MONTANA: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Please,
let's talk about them.
>>MONTANA: And
what you just said
is a society, a culture,
that is much more aware
and balanced as far as
the archetypal qualities
of the masculine and feminine.
There is in sex, the physical
act itself, which is a doing,
and there is a receptive,
receiving, passive, being part
of sexuality that opens the
door to psychic gateways.
>>REGINA: Yes.
A spiritual experience.
>>MONTANA: So that it becomes,
instead of just doing it,
it becomes a sacred
journey together.
>>REGINA: And they're
taught that early.
>>MONTANA: And they're
So it wasn't until
I was in my 30s,
and I was reading some
anthropology texts
about different sexual
cultures and how
men and women were trained.
And there was this a
whole understanding
about the Dagara
tribe in East Africa,
and they were
trained to understand
that it was a sacred
journey, it was
that the woman's body, and
womb, and vagina were actually
sacred gateways, psychic
gateways, energetic gateways
that would take the man
and the woman journeying
through whatever.
>>REGINA: To the ancestors.
>>MONTANA: To the ancestors.
And I was so shocked to compare
that to go watch the cows.
And, oh, you got the curse.
It's pathetic.
And so we wonder today
why the rape statistics,
and why we have little girls
on buses giving blow jobs.
I mean, we have so
trivialized, and so mechanized,
and so physicalized all of our
very being, let alone this most
sacred way of a man and
woman, or a man and man,
or a woman and woman coming
together, and expressing love.
It's like, oh my golly, could
we get any more separated from--
>>REGINA: Dense.
>>MONTANA: Dense.
>>REGINA: On every
level, just dense.
>>MONTANA: On every level.
>>REGINA: OK.
Sacred union.
So, now, skip forward.
You get married.
And you think this
is it, Snow White.
I'm living the dream, you
know, happily ever after.
But now your husband,
who is an attorney,
is stretched beyond
his capacity.
And now you're watching
from a man's point
of view what happens
to their life.
>>MONTANA: Right.
All I worried about was mine.
He was so overwhelmed
with survival instincts,
and he went into the whole
archetypal masculine,
I've got to make
everything secure.
And all I wanted was love,
and tenderness, and bonding.
And that went out the
window in that relationship.
And it was, again,
another example
of the incredible
tension and bifurcation
between genders and
values, and orientation.
And he was like, it's
got to be all work,
and then when I
feel secure enough,
and we've got enough
money in the bank,
and our stock portfolio
is fluffy enough,
then I can start paying
attention to you.
And I was like, no, it's
not this all or nothing.
>>REGINA: There's a journey.
>>MONTANA: There's a journey.
And there's gotta be
balance in how we express
and relate together.
But it was his way
or the highway.
And so I took the highway.
>>REGINA: You took the highway.
You continued building success
in your work, respect, jobs,
you know, raises, new jobs.
And you were doing very well.
And you ended up, again, in
a second marriage, and then
miscarriage.
And that's a big deal
in a woman's life.
>>MONTANA: It was shocking.
And it brought me to
the place in my life
where I finally started
asking the question who am I?
Who am I really?
Because I'd gone through
the whole journey in TV,
and I am somebody because
I make XYZ amount of money,
and I'm an editor,
or I'm a director.
And then I went through the
journey of husband and wife.
And that wasn't it.
And then I became-- in my
second marriage I was pregnant.
And the gestation hormones,
I had actually never wanted
children this lifetime, but the
gestation hormones just poof.
I was in mama wonderland,
picking out baby blankets,
and I can't wait to
paint the spare bedroom.
What color?
It was like, oh my golly,
who is this person?
And so when I
miscarried, and then
all of my old agendas and
soul desires came back,
it was like, well, who was that?
And am I only BF
Skinner, and talking
about a bag of chemicals.
Am I only a sex object to be
used for a man's pleasure?
Am I only going to have
to beat my brains out
to make it in the world
until I'm exhausted.
And isn't there something more?
So that was in my early 30s,
and that was at the culmination
where I bridged out of
normal material world
and started to look within,
because that was by God
the only place I hadn't looked.
>>REGINA: Well, then you did
the real Snow White thing.
You went and lived in a
little cabin in the woods.
Everything but the dwarves
were with you there.
You had your animals.
But you had to
pick up a hatchet.
I don't know how you did it.
When I was reading that
part of the book I thought,
there's no way, I couldn't
have done what you did.
You hatchet-ed your way
to repairing this place,
and bringing it, and restoring
this little cabin in the woods,
and stayed there
alone for three years.
>>MONTANA: Three years.
Yeah.
Well, I'd been raised
on a farm, so that's
kind of a catch-all for
being a handy person.
So I was no stranger to which
end of the hammer to pick up.
But it was that
time, the first time
I'd ever taken the time
to self reflective.
And I started to meditate.
And I very quickly-- obviously
the veil was very thin in me,
and I just didn't know it,
because I very quickly cracked
my whole kundilini
energy and started--
>>REGINA: Oh yeah, out of
body experiences, everything.
>>MONTANA: The whole nine yards,
which was like, oh my God.
Am I crazy?
What's this?
But then finally my
reading caught up
with my personal experiences.
And it was really-- that
was the first flowering that
said to me that there was
something else to journey
and live for, that it wasn't
all material world and material
goals, and that
there were other ways
to define myself as a human
being, and I didn't realize it.
God, hindsight is 20/20.
Until after 30 years in
the whole new age movement,
for lack of better word, new
age movement, looking back I
escaped the whole gender issue
and the feminine yet again.
My whole first 33
years of my life
I just did the rote standard,
this is where you go.
Then I start questioning
it, and then it
introduces me to, oh, well I can
become an illuminated master,
and I need to go to the
light, and these out of body
experiences, and, oh my god,
this is, wow, look at me.
I am so much more than
I ever thought I was.
>>REGINA: And that brings
a certain, for everyone,
and a lot of people
watching this right now,
a lot of our viewers have
been through this journey.
It also brings a
certain smugness to it.
>>MONTANA: Yeah,
it sure did for me.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
there's a certain--
It becomes almost an
arrogance of, well,
I know the real truth.
And then you want to tell
everybody the real truth.
And, of course, you don't always
have friendly ears listening,
and you wonder why all these
people are so closed minded.
And so you did that
whole circle too.
>>MONTANA: I did
that whole thing.
And, again, it astonishes
me to look back and go,
oh my God, I thought I was going
to be like an ascended master
and become a spiritual
teacher, and yet
I had not yet even
begun to clue into what
it was to be a chuman being,
to deal with myself as a woman.
All of that was just like
safely, OK, well, now we're
not supposed be sexual anyway.
We are spirits.
>>REGINA: Beings having
a physical experience.
>>MONTANA: Beings having
And the physical experience,
even though it's beautiful,
you know, I was introduced to
the whole goddess genre, which
seemed kind of pale
and ineffectual.
But wasn't that women anyway?
Wasn't that the feminine anyway?
Pale and kind of ineffectual?
The masculine bias in
me extended so deeply,
and still does.
I'm still uncovering
the nuances of it.
Even the language that I would
use, and bring to the table
to even talk about the
goddess was so biased already.
It was like velvet Renaissance
gowns and moon worship.
And I dismissed
it automatically,
because that was the
mindset that I had been in,
and the bias that I
had been raised in.
>>REGINA: OK, along
with studying, and going
to channelers, and all different
things that we were-- I
did all the same things at the
same time you were doing them,
too.
I totally get it.
And like you, I
tried to take home
the wonderful news about herbs
and vitamins to my family,
you know, to the hive.
And this is one of
those profound moments
in the book that
just is startling.
It just makes you want to cry.
You tried to help your mother.
You thought I have
this new knowledge.
I can help my mother.
I know she doesn't want to
hear about my weirdo aspects,
but I can at least bring
home some information for her
on a healing level.
She was having
physical problems,
and you wanted to tell her
about some herbs or vitamins,
or minerals, or
something at the time.
Share that conversation
and what happened.
She'd already shut you
out on the metaphysical.
>>MONTANA: Right.
>>REGINA: Now, you're
back with some good news
on a physical level,
alternative medicine.
>>MONTANA: My mother had
her first heart attack
when she was 45, which is not
surprising considering how
shut down she was
supposed to be.
She was heartbroken.
She was never allowed to be
her beautiful self, whatever
that was.
And so when I started presenting
the alternative medical models
and ideas, she was
equally distressed,
and didn't want any part of it.
I didn't understand it until
she finally got in my face,
literally shouted, crying, that,
I don't want to know myself,
I don't like myself,
I hate myself,
can you just drop all of this.
And that was beyond shocking.
And I didn't know what to do
with it except be respectful,
and back away from anything
that would smack of a healing.
But she was so
resistant, because she
thought so little
of herself, Regina.
She had such a complete
negative, insecure self hatred
that was the same thing
that was gnawing away
in me, that was that
old DNA programs
about feminine worthlessness,
and that she had never
been allowed to express.
She had no idea how beautiful
and what her heart was like.
And so the metaphysical
terrified her,
because it was
going to take her--
>>REGINA: You wanted her to,
as I remember you saying,
she needed to look inside.
The answer to her health
issues were inside,
and that's what triggered that.
I don't want to look inside.
I hate myself.
>>MONTANA: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And so not
even to save herself.
>>MONTANA: No.
>>REGINA: And
that's not uncommon.
I saw that a lot
with people as well.
It's like I don't want to do--
I don't want to look inside,
because people, and
women in particular,
are so terrified of what
they're going to see.
>>MONTANA: Absolutely.
Because we've been so
indelibly ingrained
in thinking that what's
inside of us is demonic.
Because if you look at
a patriarchal mindset,
and this is by no--
>>REGINA: Go back to
the Adam and Eve story.
>>MONTANA: Yeah.
And this is no way anti male.
We have masculine principles
and the feminine principles.
Yin and Yang.
And the masculine is,
I've said it before,
tends toward structure, tends
toward law, rule, static.
This is what's right.
This is what's wrong.
Live or die by it.
>>REGINA: And structure
has value as well.
>>MONTANA: Structure
has great value.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MONTANA: Structure
has great value.
But it also means that the
more fluid, dynamic, chaotic
even if you will, the darkness
of the womb of the feminine-- I
mean, the masculine has always
been related to the light.
>>REGINA: Sun.
>>MONTANA: The sun, which
is the light of intellect,
and intelligence, consciousness,
the abstract, and the law,
versus the chaotic,
the dark, the moon,
the reflected light
of the feminine,
which is utterly
uncontrollable, which
was why I was so intoxicated
with nature as a little girl.
It was my first, oh my god,
there really is a realm here
that we can operate in in a
completely different manner.
And then life happened.
And then finally
now as an adult,
and after my mother
died, it was just like,
oh my god, this is a
realm of the femin--
This is something
I have to explore.
This killed my mother.
This is a negative,
unhappy space in me
that undoubtedly is going to
be affecting me health wise.
>>REGINA: Well, and
you're a total warrioress
because you had no
fear of any boundaries.
There came a time where you
just said, I'm here to learn.
And so now comes the time,
you've left the cabin,
you've moved to the
state of Washington.
And now you go on a road trip.
We'll scoot ahead a little bit.
You go on a road trip
with a group of women
and a friend named
Tess to the southwest,
and a whole new chapter
emerges because you're
going to find out what
it is to be a woman.
>>MONTANA: Well,
to cut to the chase
I ended up, after
three husbands,
falling in love with a
woman, my best friend.
She and I did a ceremony
in the desert using MDMA.
>>REGINA: It's called
the spirit molecule.
>>MONTANA: It's called
And I saw the goddess Gaia.
I saw the spirit of Earth.
And everything, it
was like a flashback
to when I was a kid on my pony.
It was just like all of a sudden
the whole world just opened up,
and it's like, oh my god,
here's life as a palpable,
conscious intelligence, and
a force to be reckoned with.
And, yes, I did happen to
fall in love with Tess.
>>REGINA: And you were partners.
>>MONTANA: And we are
partners for ten years.
Yes.
>>REGINA: The lesbian world was
very different than the world
you had just come out of, and
there were certain topics,
and ways of relating, and--
>>MONTANA: It was relational.
>>REGINA: It was
relational.
>>MONTANA: It was emotional.
And it was intoxicating in that.
And I, again, upon
reflection have realized,
I was so closed and so
jaundiced and prejudiced
against all things feminine,
growing up the way I grew up,
that I actually had
to bring a woman to me
to start to love the feminine.
God knows I couldn't look in
the mirror and do it myself.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MONTANA: And so when I
fell in love with Tess,
I brought a reflection
of the feminine.
And, oh my god, and her
insecurity and her fears,
and her, what looked
like weaknesses,
which was just vulnerability.
What a concept,
vulnerability, to be open,
and to be willing
to let life happen.
And she and all
my women friends,
because almost
literally overnight I
went from being completely in
a world of men, to completely
in a world of
lesbians, and, I mean,
even my mechanic was a lesbian.
It was just like, oh my God,
where did all the men go?
>>REGINA: They're gone.
That's not your
lesson at the moment.
>>MONTANA: That was not
my lesson at the moment.
So that was an amazing
10 year journey.
And it's a whole book in itself
what I learned during that.
>>REGINA: And it is
a fascinating thing.
And as you went through this,
you learned probably more
about yourself than you
had learned before up
to that point, and about
femininity, and about where
the feminine just
runs over and becomes
as masculine as the masculine.
And let's talk
about the split up,
when you finally went
separate ways with Tess.
I thought that was hysterical.
I mean, I had to
say, I was laughing.
I shouldn't have.
But I was laughing.
Tell everybody what
she said to you.
First of all, so during
this period you thought,
hey, I do not have to
impress men any more.
>>MONTANA: Nope.
>>REGINA: I don't need make up.
I can put on a few pounds.
So you know, packed
on 50 pounds.
>>MONTANA: I don't have
to wear make up anymore.
Yeah.
I don't have to be
feminine anymore.
So anyway, after 10 years
together she just looked at me
and she said, I'm in
love with somebody else.
You're just not--
She just reflects
such beauty of womanhood
to me, and you're not
feminine enough for me.
>>REGINA: A woman left you
for someone more feminine.
I love it.
>>MONTANA: Oh my God.
So what do you do with that?
>>REGINA: Well, you
looked in the mirror.
>>MONTANA: I looked in the
mirror, and I was like,
OK, I had embraced the
feminine, but I had not
embodied the feminine.
And so that put me on
a several year journey,
and I was down in South
America, and one of the greatest
teachers I have ever met is
ayahuasca, a feminine plant
medicine.
And I stress the word medicine.
She is not anything
recreational.
She is a consciousness
and a healer.
And I worked with
several shamans
down in Peru, and in Ecuador.
And ayahuasca opened
me for the first time
into the-- that
dark place within me
that had never been addressed.
20 years-- Now, I could
go into a somadee state.
Thank you very much.
25, I could leave my
body almost at will.
I admit, I had the medication
and the spiritual groove
down just great.
But then she took
me into my body,
and showed me what was
locked into my DNA,
and issues in my soul.
And my very first journey with
ayahuasca, I was like, well,
I'm going to guide the
energy up my spine,
and I'm going to
blossom the pineal.
And then I'm going to.
And that was my intent
going in, and she just
hammered me, and took me,
crushed me like a boulder,
and took me into my genetics
and the pattern that
had killed my mother and
killed my grandmother, which
was this ancient
self loathing that
was the feminine inheritance,
my feminine inheritance, why
I had eschewed the feminine
and never gone there
all of my life.
And it was so horrific.
It took me back
to those early age
four memories, DNA,
cellular, soul,
lifetime memories of
being incarcerated,
of being tortured, of being
raped, being endlessly
subjugated and
suppressed, and never
allowed to shine, and be the
beautiful, radiant, life force
breathing goddess
that we all are.
And the feminine is
in men as well as.
It's the feminine principle.
And it's that unbridled,
passionate, glorious place
that allows and
enables everything.
It's the creative force.
So that was my introduction
to deep body work,
and my first real
introduction to where
I had to go to
unearth my feminine.
And so I did a lot of
ceremonial work with ayahuasca.
>>REGINA: And then you ended
up in Central America and Costa
Rica.
And you were, again, going
out of the flow of your life
that you had built into the area
of exploration, which I totally
admire the fact you've just
taken these chunks of time
to just go explore.
And the sweetest thing happened.
And you talk about the
sweetest thing in Costa Rica.
One had to do with,
I think you were
going to be issued a citation.
And the way the men
would view women
in Costa Rica,
which was so sweet.
>>MONTANA: It is truly
a land of the feminine,
and the men appreciated.
I mean, I would be whistled at.
And men would hand
me flowers as I
would-- Old men, young men, as
I would take my morning walk.
But it was never anything lewd
or licentious, or come on baby.
It was none of that,
no overtones like that.
And I remember, yes, I got
a speeding ticket one day.
And the officer, you know,
he's handing me the ticket.
And his mustache is drooping.
And he kisses my
hand, and he says
what beautiful eyes I have.
And he's just so sorry
he has to do this,
but 20,000 calones
will make it go away.
And he kissed my hand
again when I gave him
the 20,000-- you
know, it was 20 bucks.
>>REGINA: And explained
he has kids in school?
>>MONTANA: And explained
he had children in college
that he was putting
through college.
And bribery was
the way to do it.
I was happy to give
him the 20 bucks.
But it was such a, after
the real deep, nitty gritty,
internal work I did with
shamans and with ayahuasca.
I was ready for a
different kind of healing.
And so I went to the jungle,
borgidvia and every flower
known to creation was there.
And it was such a
soft and gentle land.
And deeply, the natural world
is the icon of Costa Rica.
It's in the environmental
kingdom of the world.
And so I was nurtured
in a whole new way.
And I gave myself that.
I took a year and a half
down there and just started
writing a book.
I did do some work, and
actually wrote a screenplay,
but aside from that I just
be'd, and soaked it up.
And so that was my first
kind of-- And I came back,
and I lost all the weight.
And I totally took
my hair to blonde.
And it was just
like, oh, and I was
in my body in a whole new way.
And I was with my soul
in a whole new way.
>>REGINA: And you had
started integrating
what all the ancient traditions
see as this spirit that
whispers the information into
physical form of the feminine,
and that's how it's always been.
>>MONTANA: It was no longer
a token idea about, oh yes,
the material world
is spirit made flesh.
Hum.
You know, let's go to the light.
It was this is really,
really where it's at.
And I had a really
terrifying experience
in South America, where the camp
of the ayahuascaro I was with
was under a bandit attack.
And I could have well
ended up hacked, and raped,
and mutilated yet
one more lifetime.
It didn't work out that way.
But in that dark moment of
terror, and gunfire, and dogs
it was just like, where was
somadee when I needed it.
You know, it's just
like oh my God,
all those years of meditation,
where the hell was it,
and what good did it do me
at that point in my life?
>>REGINA: And what
you came down to
is it's a really basic battle.
And there's a
beautiful letter that
was written by Thomas Jefferson
called "My Heart and My
Head" to the woman he
loved, Maria Cosway.
And you came down
to this very thing.
In the end, masculine,
feminine, call it what you want.
You had done your
own integration.
It was coming down to the
simple heart and the head.
>>MONTANA: Absolutely.
They do not do well
without one another.
>>REGINA: They do not.
>>MONTANA: They do not.
>>REGINA: And so, now,
I want to go somewhere
where we weren't planning on,
but you told me off camera.
>>MONTANA: Ah yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>MONTANA: Here we go.
>>REGINA: Now,
here you go again.
And you went back into
the world of relationship
with a man that offered a
whole new opportunity, slash
challenge, slash horror
in your life, which
is going to be the
subject of your next book.
And, I mean, I can't really
quite-- Yeah, go ahead.
>>MONTANA: OK, so I've done
all this wonderful integration.
I'm feeling as fem
as could possibly be,
and spending a lot less time in
meditation and a lot more time
feeling every emotion, feeling
what my body's message is,
and becoming a
walking meditation,
and it's been an
astounding integration.
So I take that,
and I fall in love
with a younger man who ends up
after almost a year and a half
of seeing each other to be
a fundamentalist Christian.
And he laid it on the line.
For us to get married, I had
to come to Jesus through him,
and be saved from my wretched,
pagan, feminist, sinful ways.
And he'd hidden it from me.
And I'm not stupid.
But he-- Because he knew
it would undoubtedly--
>>REGINA: But you
really loved this man.
I mean, this was a very
passionate wonderful.
>>MONTANA: This
was my soul mate.
This was the man that I'd
been waiting lifetimes for.
And I'd never been in
love like that, Regina.
And so I tried it on.
I did the doggonedest
I could, and actually
went into a non
meditative state where
I negated any connection with
the divine, where I negated
all spiritual light
within me, and where
I was a wretched, damned
sinner, and that I
had to be rescued by Jesus
and fit into this story
that Jehovah had cooked up
for me as one of the elite,
because obviously
if I came to Jesus,
I was one of the
elite and the elect.
>>REGINA: I can't
believe you did that.
>>MONTANA: That was
only one night, Regina.
>>REGINA: After everything
you'd been through.
>>MONTANA: And it was the
most horrific, demon ridden,
dark hellhole I had ever put
myself in in consciousness.
And I came out of that
experience realizing, well,
not only could I not go there
and accept the parameters
of our marriage, and
that was of course
the death knell of the
relationship, which
was incredibly, incredibly
hard to go through,
but it put me on a
totally unexpected path.
If I thought writing
about the feminine
was an unexpected path,
writing about anything to do
with fundamentalist, Abrahamic
based fundamentalism,
whether it be Islam,
Judaism, or Christianity
is about the last place I
thought I would never go.
But I was so shocked to see
how completely my newly found
nurtured, beautiful, feminine,
body oriented, fully sexual,
fully engaged, passionate,
sometimes chaotic,
rich life had been completely
just-- That is not worth it.
I can't go there.
And it's just like oh my God.
So that's the whole next
book is the demonization
of the feminine and the
soul that these religions
and that kind of
fundamentalism has taken us to,
and is still ripping
us apart to this day.
It's a stunning story.
>>REGINA: That is one of
the weirdest epilogues.
If you could have told me any
story to follow up that book,
that's the last thing
I would have guessed.
>>MONTANA: Right.
Me, too.
>>REGINA: But,
again, like I said.
You are one of the most
intrepid people on the planet.
I've never read a
story of a woman who
just wanted to go head on and
face everything, and to know,
to go that deep into
knowing, and express
all these aspects of
life in one lifetime.
I mean, it's a wild ride.
>>MONTANA: It has
been a real wild ride.
It ain't over yet.
>>REGINA: And not only that.
You're an absolutely
beautiful writer.
I was very impressed.
But you told me, we were
talking on the phone,
a little bit before
I read this book when
we had arranged for this
interview, and I said,
I am so tired.
I've got so many
different books lined up
to read right now to get
ready for the next interview,
and I'm just kind of pushed.
And you said, oh,
you're going to hate me.
This is a page turner.
You're right.
Your story was a page turner.
So how long's it going
to take before we
get to see this
next weird story?
>>MONTANA: I'm talking
to Hay House now.
I think 2015 fall.
>>REGINA: 2015 fall.
OK.
So come back on the show then.
>>MONTANA: I would
love to, Regina.
>>REGINA: OK, because
this yin yang thing
is going to take a long time
for all of us to work out.
It's embedded so deeply
>>MONTANA: It's enormous.
>>REGINA: Within our psyche.
Thank you.
>>MONTANA: Thank you.
>>REGINA: So for me, the message
is that we can no longer afford
to operate on only half
of our consciousness,
be it male or
female, but it will
take conscious words,
reactions, and understanding
to bring the masculine and
feminine into balance within us
and our world.
Cate's beautifully written
memoir, "Unearthing Venus."
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]